docs/getting-started/claude-code.md, before:

# Claude Code Installation Guide

Detailed guide for installing and configuring rp1 on Claude Code.

---

## Prerequisites

!!! info "System Requirements"
    - **Claude Code** installed and working ([download](https://claude.ai/code))
    - **macOS, Linux, or Windows** with WSL
    - **A codebase** you want to enhance with rp1 workflows

Before proceeding, verify Claude Code is working:

```bash
claude --version
```

You should see version information. If not, install Claude Code first from [claude.ai/code](https://claude.ai/code).

---

## Installation

### Step 1: Add the rp1 marketplace

Open Claude Code in your terminal and run:

```bash
/plugin marketplace add rp1-run/rp1
```

**Expected output:**
```
Marketplace 'rp1-run/rp1' added successfully.
```

### Step 2: Install the base plugin

```bash
/plugin install rp1-base
```

**Expected output:**
```
Plugin 'rp1-base' installed successfully.
```

### Step 3: Install the dev plugin

```bash
/plugin install rp1-dev
```

**Expected output:**
```
Plugin 'rp1-dev' installed successfully.
```

### Step 4: Restart Claude Code

Close and reopen Claude Code to load the new plugins.

!!! warning "Restart Required"
    The plugins won't be available until you restart Claude Code. Make sure to close all Claude Code sessions before reopening.

---

## Verification

After restarting, verify the installation:

```bash
/help
```

You should see rp1 commands listed. Look for commands like `knowledge-build`, `feature-requirements`, `pr-review`, etc.

### Quick Test

Run your first rp1 command to build a knowledge base:

```bash
/knowledge-build
```

If successful, you'll see:
```
READY [single-project]
```
or for a monorepo:
```
READY [monorepo: N projects]
```

---

## Configuration

### Plugin Updates

To update rp1 to the latest version:

```bash
/plugin update rp1-base
/plugin update rp1-dev
```

### Uninstalling

If you need to remove rp1:

```bash
/plugin uninstall rp1-dev
/plugin uninstall rp1-base
```

---

## Troubleshooting

??? question "Commands not appearing after installation?"

    **Solution**: Make sure you completely restarted Claude Code. Close all terminal windows running Claude Code, then start a fresh session.

    If commands still don't appear, verify the plugins are installed:
    ```bash
    /plugin list
    ```

    You should see `rp1-base` and `rp1-dev` in the list.

??? question "Marketplace not found error?"

    **Solution**: The marketplace command may need GitHub authentication. Ensure you're logged into GitHub:
    ```bash
    gh auth status
    ```

    If not authenticated:
    ```bash
    gh auth login
    ```

??? question "Plugin install fails?"

    **Solution**: Check your internet connection and try again. If the issue persists, try removing and re-adding the marketplace:
    ```bash
    /plugin marketplace remove rp1-run/rp1
    /plugin marketplace add rp1-run/rp1
    /plugin install rp1-base
    ```

??? question "Knowledge build takes a long time?"

    First-time builds analyze your entire codebase and can take **10-15 minutes** for large projects. Subsequent builds are incremental and typically take **2-5 minutes**.

    If a build seems stuck, check:

    - Your codebase size (very large repos take longer)
    - Available memory (close other applications if needed)

??? question "Getting 'Plugin not found' errors?"

    Make sure you installed both plugins in the correct order:

    1. `rp1-base` must be installed first (it has no dependencies)
    2. `rp1-dev` depends on `rp1-base`

---

## Next Steps

Now that rp1 is installed:

- [:octicons-arrow-right-24: Quick Start](quickstart.md) - Run your first commands
- [:octicons-arrow-right-24: Feature Development Guide](../guides/feature-development.md) - Build your first feature with rp1
- [:octicons-arrow-right-24: Command Reference](../reference/index.md) - Explore all 21 commands

Commit message:

feat(prompts): enhance kb load (#78)
* feat: use knowledge progressively

* feat: make agents progressively load kb

* feat(cli): init command for injecting rp1 prompts

* feat(prompts): agents with full load

* feat: update docs with kb aware agentic flows

docs/getting-started/claude-code.md, after:

# Claude Code Installation Guide

Detailed guide for installing and configuring rp1 on Claude Code.

---

## Prerequisites

!!! info "System Requirements"
    - **Claude Code** installed and working ([download](https://claude.ai/code))
    - **macOS, Linux, or Windows** with WSL
    - **A codebase** you want to enhance with rp1 workflows

Before proceeding, verify Claude Code is working:

```bash
claude --version
```

You should see version information. If not, install Claude Code first from [claude.ai/code](https://claude.ai/code).

---

## Installation

### Step 1: Add the rp1 marketplace

Open Claude Code in your terminal and run:

```bash
/plugin marketplace add rp1-run/rp1
```

**Expected output:**
```
Marketplace 'rp1-run/rp1' added successfully.
```

### Step 2: Install the base plugin

```bash
/plugin install rp1-base
```

**Expected output:**
```
Plugin 'rp1-base' installed successfully.
```

### Step 3: Install the dev plugin

```bash
/plugin install rp1-dev
```

**Expected output:**
```
Plugin 'rp1-dev' installed successfully.
```

### Step 4: Restart Claude Code

Close and reopen Claude Code to load the new plugins.

!!! warning "Restart Required"
    The plugins won't be available until you restart Claude Code. Make sure to close all Claude Code sessions before reopening.

---

## Verification

After restarting, verify the installation:

```bash
/help
```

You should see rp1 commands listed. Look for commands like `knowledge-build`, `feature-requirements`, `pr-review`, etc.

### Quick Test

Run your first rp1 command to build a knowledge base:

```bash
/knowledge-build
```

If successful, you'll see:
```
READY [single-project]
```
or for a monorepo:
```
READY [monorepo: N projects]
```

---

## Inject rp1 Knowledge (Optional)

If you have the rp1 CLI installed, you can inject rp1 context directly into your project's CLAUDE.md or AGENTS.md:

```bash
rp1 init
```

Auto-detects CLAUDE.md or AGENTS.md and adds KB loading patterns. Running again updates existing content.

---

## Configuration

### Plugin Updates

To update rp1 to the latest version:

```bash
/plugin update rp1-base
/plugin update rp1-dev
```

### Uninstalling

If you need to remove rp1:

```bash
/plugin uninstall rp1-dev
/plugin uninstall rp1-base
```

---

## Troubleshooting

??? question "Commands not appearing after installation?"

    **Solution**: Make sure you completely restarted Claude Code. Close all terminal windows running Claude Code, then start a fresh session.

    If commands still don't appear, verify the plugins are installed:
    ```bash
    /plugin list
    ```

    You should see `rp1-base` and `rp1-dev` in the list.

??? question "Marketplace not found error?"

    **Solution**: The marketplace command may need GitHub authentication. Ensure you're logged into GitHub:
    ```bash
    gh auth status
    ```

    If not authenticated:
    ```bash
    gh auth login
    ```

??? question "Plugin install fails?"

    **Solution**: Check your internet connection and try again. If the issue persists, try removing and re-adding the marketplace:
    ```bash
    /plugin marketplace remove rp1-run/rp1
    /plugin marketplace add rp1-run/rp1
    /plugin install rp1-base
    ```

??? question "Knowledge build takes a long time?"

    First-time builds analyze your entire codebase and can take **10-15 minutes** for large projects. Subsequent builds are incremental and typically take **2-5 minutes**.

    If a build seems stuck, check:

    - Your codebase size (very large repos take longer)
    - Available memory (close other applications if needed)

??? question "Getting 'Plugin not found' errors?"

    Make sure you installed both plugins in the correct order:

    1. `rp1-base` must be installed first (it has no dependencies)
    2. `rp1-dev` depends on `rp1-base`

---

## Next Steps

Now that rp1 is installed:

- [:octicons-arrow-right-24: Quick Start](quickstart.md) - Run your first commands
- [:octicons-arrow-right-24: Feature Development Guide](../guides/feature-development.md) - Build your first feature with rp1
- [:octicons-arrow-right-24: Command Reference](../reference/index.md) - Explore all 21 commands
