docs/getting-started/first-workflow.md, before:

# Your First Workflow

You've installed rp1. Now let's put it to work.

---

## Build Your Knowledge Base

The first step with any codebase is building a **knowledge base**. This teaches rp1 about your project's structure, architecture, and patterns.

=== "Claude Code"

    ```bash
    /knowledge-build
    ```

=== "OpenCode"

    ```bash
    /rp1-base/knowledge-build
    ```

### Expected Output

After the command completes, you'll see:

```
READY [monorepo: 2 projects]
```

or for a single project:

```
READY [single-project]
```

---

## What Just Happened?

The `knowledge-build` command analyzed your codebase and created five files in `.rp1/context/`:

| File | Contents |
|------|----------|
| `index.md` | Project overview and entry points |
| `architecture.md` | System patterns and component relationships |
| `modules.md` | Module breakdown and dependencies |
| `concept_map.md` | Domain terminology and business concepts |
| `patterns.md` | Code conventions and implementation patterns |

Future rp1 commands use this knowledge base to understand your codebase context, making their outputs more accurate and relevant.

!!! tip "Incremental Updates"
    First builds take 10-15 minutes for large projects. Subsequent runs are incremental and complete in 2-5 minutes.

---

## Common Commands

Now that rp1 understands your codebase, try these workflows:

<div class="grid cards" markdown>

-   :material-file-document-edit: **Start a New Feature**

    ---

    Create a charter and PRD for a new project or feature.

    `/blueprint`

-   :material-clipboard-check: **Gather Requirements**

    ---

    Collect and structure requirements for a feature.

    `/feature-requirements my-feature`

-   :material-pencil-ruler: **Create Technical Design**

    ---

    Generate detailed technical specifications.

    `/feature-design my-feature`

-   :material-source-pull: **Review a Pull Request**

    ---

    Get structured feedback on code changes.

    `/pr-review`

</div>

---

## Next Steps

<div class="grid cards" markdown>

-   :material-book-open-variant: **[Guides](../guides/index.md)**

    ---

    Step-by-step tutorials for feature development, PR review, and more.

-   :material-book-search: **[Reference](../reference/index.md)**

    ---

    Complete documentation for all commands.

-   :material-lightbulb: **[Concepts](../concepts/index.md)**

    ---

    Understand constitutional prompting and knowledge-aware agents.

</div>

Commit message:

docs: update docs to match current version of code

docs/getting-started/first-workflow.md, after:

# Your First Workflow

You've installed rp1. Now let's put it to work.

---

## Choose Your Path

=== "Existing Codebase"

    You have an existing project and want rp1 to learn it. **Continue below** to build your knowledge base.

=== "Starting Fresh"

    You're creating a brand new project from scratch.

    [Go to Bootstrap Guide :material-arrow-right:](../guides/bootstrap.md){ .md-button .md-button--primary }

    The bootstrap workflow will guide you through project creation with charter interviews, tech stack selection, and scaffolding.

---

## Build Your Knowledge Base

The first step with any existing codebase is building a **knowledge base**. This teaches rp1 about your project's structure, architecture, and patterns.

=== "Claude Code"

    ```bash
    /knowledge-build
    ```

=== "OpenCode"

    ```bash
    /rp1-base/knowledge-build
    ```

### Expected Output

After the command completes, you'll see:

```
READY [monorepo: 2 projects]
```

or for a single project:

```
READY [single-project]
```

---

## What Just Happened?

The `knowledge-build` command analyzed your codebase and created five files in `.rp1/context/`:

| File | Contents |
|------|----------|
| `index.md` | Project overview and entry points |
| `architecture.md` | System patterns and component relationships |
| `modules.md` | Module breakdown and dependencies |
| `concept_map.md` | Domain terminology and business concepts |
| `patterns.md` | Code conventions and implementation patterns |

Future rp1 commands use this knowledge base to understand your codebase context, making their outputs more accurate and relevant.

!!! tip "Incremental Updates"
    First builds take 10-15 minutes for large projects. Subsequent runs are incremental and complete in 2-5 minutes.

---

## Ready to Ship? Start Here

The **recommended next step** is to build a feature. This is rp1's flagship workflow - from requirements to deployed code.

[Start Feature Development :material-arrow-right:](../guides/feature-development.md){ .md-button .md-button--primary }

---

## Explore More Workflows

Now that rp1 understands your codebase, try these workflows:

<div class="grid cards" markdown>

-   :material-file-document-edit: **Start a New Feature**

    ---

    Create a charter and PRD for a new project or feature.

    `/blueprint`

-   :material-clipboard-check: **Gather Requirements**

    ---

    Collect and structure requirements for a feature.

    `/feature-requirements my-feature`

-   :material-pencil-ruler: **Create Technical Design**

    ---

    Generate detailed technical specifications.

    `/feature-design my-feature`

-   :material-source-pull: **Review a Pull Request**

    ---

    Get structured feedback on code changes.

    `/pr-review`

</div>

---

## Next Steps

<div class="grid cards" markdown>

-   :material-book-open-variant: **[Guides](../guides/index.md)**

    ---

    Step-by-step tutorials for feature development, PR review, and more.

-   :material-book-search: **[Reference](../reference/index.md)**

    ---

    Complete documentation for all commands.

-   :material-lightbulb: **[Concepts](../concepts/index.md)**

    ---

    Understand constitutional prompting and knowledge-aware agents.

</div>
