docs/reference/base/knowledge-build.md, before:

# knowledge-build

Orchestrates parallel knowledge base generation using spatial analysis and a map-reduce architecture.

---

## Synopsis

=== "Claude Code"

    ```bash
    /knowledge-build
    ```

=== "OpenCode"

    ```bash
    /rp1-base/knowledge-build
    ```

## Description

The `knowledge-build` command analyzes your codebase and generates a structured knowledge base in `.rp1/context/`. This KB powers all knowledge-aware agents, enabling them to understand your architecture, patterns, and conventions.

The command uses a parallel map-reduce architecture:

1. **Spatial Analysis**: Categorizes files by KB section
2. **Parallel Processing**: 5 agents analyze files simultaneously
3. **Merge**: Combines results into final KB files

## Parameters

| Parameter | Default | Description |
|-----------|---------|-------------|
| `RP1_ROOT` | `.rp1/` | Root directory for KB artifacts |
| `CODEBASE_ROOT` | `.` | Repository root to analyze |
| `EXCLUDE_PATTERNS` | `node_modules/,.git/,build/,dist/` | Patterns to exclude |

## Build Modes

The command automatically detects the appropriate build mode:

| Mode | Condition | Duration |
|------|-----------|----------|
| **Skip** | KB exists, no git changes | Instant |
| **Full** | First build or >50 files changed | 10-15 min |
| **Incremental** | <50 files changed since last build | 2-5 min |

## Output

The command generates these files in `.rp1/context/`:

| File | Contents | Shareable? |
|------|----------|------------|
| `index.md` | Project overview, structure, entry points | Yes |
| `architecture.md` | System architecture, patterns, integrations | Yes |
| `modules.md` | Component breakdown, dependencies | Yes |
| `concept_map.md` | Domain concepts, terminology | Yes |
| `patterns.md` | Implementation patterns, idioms | Yes |
| `state.json` | Build metadata, git commit reference | Yes |
| `meta.json` | Local paths (repo_root, current_project_path) | **No** - add to .gitignore |

## Examples

### First-Time Build

=== "Claude Code"

    ```bash
    /knowledge-build
    ```

=== "OpenCode"

    ```bash
    /rp1-base/knowledge-build
    ```

**Expected output:**
```
First-time KB generation with parallel analysis (10-15 min)
Analyzing... (Phase 2/5)
✅ Knowledge Base Generated Successfully

Strategy: Parallel map-reduce
Repository: single-project
Files Analyzed: 142

KB Files Written:
- .rp1/context/index.md
- .rp1/context/concept_map.md
- .rp1/context/architecture.md
- .rp1/context/modules.md
- .rp1/context/patterns.md
- .rp1/context/state.json (shareable)
- .rp1/context/meta.json (local - add to .gitignore)
```

### Incremental Build

When you've made changes since the last build:

**Expected output:**
```
Changes detected since last build (a1b2c3d → e4f5g6h). Analyzing 12 changed files (2-5 min)
✅ Knowledge Base Generated Successfully
```

### No Changes

When the codebase hasn't changed:

**Expected output:**
```
✓ KB is up-to-date (commit a1b2c3d). No regeneration needed.
```

## Architecture

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    subgraph "Phase 1"
        SA[Spatial Analyzer]
    end

    subgraph "Phase 2 (Parallel)"
        A1[index-builder]
        A2[concept-extractor]
        A3[architecture-mapper]
        A4[module-analyzer]
        A5[pattern-extractor]
    end

    subgraph "Phase 3"
        M[Merge & Write]
    end

    SA --> A1
    SA --> A2
    SA --> A3
    SA --> A4
    SA --> A5

    A1 --> M
    A2 --> M
    A3 --> M
    A4 --> M
    A5 --> M
```

## Related Commands

- [`knowledge-load`](knowledge-load.md) - Load KB context for agents

## See Also

- [Knowledge-Aware Agents](../../concepts/knowledge-aware-agents.md) - How agents use the KB
- [Map-Reduce Workflows](../../concepts/map-reduce-workflows.md) - The parallel architecture

Commit message:

feat: update docs to match features and some prompt improvements (#139)
- **refactor: birds eye view is terse**
- **feat: add scribe and generate-user-docs**
- **refactor: tersify scribe**
- **chore: add better local-install with path to update rp1-local**
- **docs: update docs to match current version of code**
- **docs: update with better IA**
- **feat: feature-design now takes into account user-facing doc impact
and tracks them**
- **fix: ensure biome is run after asset generation**

docs/reference/base/knowledge-build.md, after:

# knowledge-build

Orchestrates parallel knowledge base generation using spatial analysis and a map-reduce architecture.

---

## Synopsis

=== "Claude Code"

    ```bash
    /knowledge-build
    ```

=== "OpenCode"

    ```bash
    /rp1-base/knowledge-build
    ```

## Description

The `knowledge-build` command analyzes your codebase and generates a structured knowledge base in `.rp1/context/`. This KB powers all knowledge-aware agents, enabling them to understand your architecture, patterns, and conventions.

The command uses a parallel map-reduce architecture:

1. **Spatial Analysis**: Categorizes files by KB section
2. **Parallel Processing**: 5 agents analyze files simultaneously
3. **Merge**: Combines results into final KB files

## Parameters

| Parameter | Default | Description |
|-----------|---------|-------------|
| `RP1_ROOT` | `.rp1/` | Root directory for KB artifacts |
| `CODEBASE_ROOT` | `.` | Repository root to analyze |
| `EXCLUDE_PATTERNS` | `node_modules/,.git/,build/,dist/` | Patterns to exclude |

## Build Modes

The command automatically detects the appropriate build mode:

| Mode | Condition | Duration |
|------|-----------|----------|
| **Skip** | KB exists, no git changes | Instant |
| **Full** | First build or >50 files changed | 10-15 min |
| **Incremental** | <50 files changed since last build | 2-5 min |

## Output

The command generates knowledge base files in `.rp1/context/`.

!!! info "KB File Reference"
    See [What's in the Knowledge Base?](../../concepts/knowledge-aware-agents.md#whats-in-the-knowledge-base) for the complete list of generated files and their purposes.

**Note**: `meta.json` contains local paths and should be added to `.gitignore`. All other files are shareable with your team.

## Examples

### First-Time Build

=== "Claude Code"

    ```bash
    /knowledge-build
    ```

=== "OpenCode"

    ```bash
    /rp1-base/knowledge-build
    ```

**Expected output:**
```
First-time KB generation with parallel analysis (10-15 min)
Analyzing... (Phase 2/5)
✅ Knowledge Base Generated Successfully

Strategy: Parallel map-reduce
Repository: single-project
Files Analyzed: 142

KB Files Written:
- .rp1/context/index.md
- .rp1/context/concept_map.md
- .rp1/context/architecture.md
- .rp1/context/modules.md
- .rp1/context/patterns.md
- .rp1/context/state.json (shareable)
- .rp1/context/meta.json (local - add to .gitignore)
```

### Incremental Build

When you've made changes since the last build:

**Expected output:**
```
Changes detected since last build (a1b2c3d → e4f5g6h). Analyzing 12 changed files (2-5 min)
✅ Knowledge Base Generated Successfully
```

### No Changes

When the codebase hasn't changed:

**Expected output:**
```
✓ KB is up-to-date (commit a1b2c3d). No regeneration needed.
```

## Architecture

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    subgraph "Phase 1"
        SA[Spatial Analyzer]
    end

    subgraph "Phase 2 (Parallel)"
        A1[index-builder]
        A2[concept-extractor]
        A3[architecture-mapper]
        A4[module-analyzer]
        A5[pattern-extractor]
    end

    subgraph "Phase 3"
        M[Merge & Write]
    end

    SA --> A1
    SA --> A2
    SA --> A3
    SA --> A4
    SA --> A5

    A1 --> M
    A2 --> M
    A3 --> M
    A4 --> M
    A5 --> M
```

## Related Commands

- [`knowledge-load`](knowledge-load.md) - Load KB context for agents

## See Also

- [Knowledge-Aware Agents](../../concepts/knowledge-aware-agents.md) - How agents use the KB
- [Map-Reduce Workflows](../../concepts/map-reduce-workflows.md) - The parallel architecture
